# Abstract

Historical linguistics developed in the 19th century in Europe. The genealogical relationships and the diachronic evolution of the language family are revealed via comparing lexical items of the interested languages. For example, the well-known Indo-European language family is the first language family which was identified by using the comparative method. This method has been widely applied, and linguists have found lots of language families in various sizes in the world. Today, historical linguists have made groundbreaking findings to some specific language families by repetitively applying comparative method. Nevertheless, we have limited knowledge about most of the language families in the world, some language families are even under debates about the labels. The issue lies in that the massive and sporadic linguistic data has reached the practical limits of the traditional comparative method.

Because of the interdisciplinary studies is under the spotlight over recent decades, a substantial amount of linguistic data has been digitalized and lots of computer algorithms have developed. While existing methods emphasize on completely computer-driven, our project, also known as the computer-assisted language comparison, dedicates on developing methods which integrate informatics and historical linguistics. The reason to take a semi-automatic strategy is that many issues cannot be solved solely by computer programs, for example, the various formats of lexical data, the glosses are not always the same annotation, sound changes and semantic shifts might lower the accuracy of cognate detection. In the situation that the computer applications are not capable of fully replacing experts' experience and intuition, and experts do not have enough time to analyze the massive amounts of data, a computer-assisted approach is thus developed. The computing power can take over the boring and repetitive tasks, such as, preprocessing raw data, phonetic sequences alignments, cognate detections and lastly, the sound correspondences. The programs can deliver the convincing results. And experts are encouraged to intervene at any stage to adjust the inputs and the outputs. Our goal is to develop a framework which combine the efficiency and consistency of computing power and the flexibility as well as accuracy of expert judgements.

This talk, the fundamentals of computer-assisted language comparison is divided into three sections. Dr. Tiago Tresoldi will introduce the softwares and methods which our group have developed. PhD student Mei-Shin Wu will present the interfaces and the semi automatic workflows which combines all the existing computation tools. PhD student Nathanael E. Schweikhard will further illustrate data annotation and the modeling.
